# Call for postdoctoral researcher

We solicit postdoctoral researchers working for the research project ["General
computer architecture and system software that accomplish 100x performance on
2028 (Riken R-CCS (primary contractor), Tokyo Institute of Technology and
University of Tokyo),"](https://www.nedo.go.jp/koubo/IT3_100063.html) awarded
by NEDO exploratory research program ["Development of efficient high
performance AI chips and next-generation computing
technology"](https://www.nedo.go.jp/koubo/IT3_100063.html).

  * Project Period: 2018 - 2022 (there will be a stage gate (an mid term evaluation)) 

Taura group at the University of Tokyo will conduct "Research on high-
performance programming models and implementation techniques based on a novel
computing principle" in this project. The research plans in the proposal are
found below, but we are happy to seek more specific directions with the
joining researcher. I welcome researchers who are capable of conducting
researches that give us a deep insight into the design and implementation of
parallel programming languages aligned with future high-performance computing
architectures.

Explore programming models and their implementations for a computer
architecture around 2028 and evaluate them with representative applications
(about 20 HPC, big data and AI applications).

Programming models (programming languages) are interfaces between programmers
and computers; as such, they will become more and more important in future
computers, which are increasingly more complex and more hierarchical, so as
not to increase the burden on the programmer. Programming models and their
implementations are important when studying application performance on future
architectures, because performance prediction by searching architectural
parameters often assumes ideal load balancing and data distribution or a
programming model of today, which is not necessarily suitable for future
architectures.

In this subgoal of research, we will be focused on technologies driving high
performance computing of the future, such as high bandwidth memory, deep
memory hierarchy and high bandwidth optical networks, will explore programming
models and/or their implementation techniques and evaluate their performance
with applications.

  1. (with Riken and Tokyo Institute of Technology) Searching for representative applications and analyzing them 
  2. Design of programming models and their implementations 
  3. Performance evaluation of architectures and programming models 

# ポスドク研究員募集

[高効率・高速処理を可能とするAIチップ・次世代コンピューティングの技術開発](https://www.nedo.go.jp/koubo/IT3_100063.html)に採択された,
[「2028年に性能100倍を達成する汎用性の高い高性能計算機アーキテクチャとシステムソフトウェア技術(国立研究開発法人理化学研究所,
国立大学法人東京工業大学,
国立大学法人東京大学)」](https://www.nedo.go.jp/koubo/IT3_100063.html)の研究に従事するポスドク研究員を募集します.

  * プロジェクト期間 平成30年度～平成34年度 (途中, ステージゲート(中間審査)があります) 

東京大学田浦研究室ではこの中で,【新計算原理に基づく高性能プログラミングモデルと実装技術に関する研究】を実施します. 以下は提案書・実施計画書の内容ですが,
以下を踏まえた上で, ともに議論をしながら方向性の模索を行っていきたいと思っています.
将来の高性能計算機のアーキテクチャの動向を踏まえた並列プログラミング言語の設計やその処理系の実装について,
洞察が得られる研究を実行できる研究者の参画を歓迎します.

代表アプリケーション（20程度のHPC・ビッグデータ・AIアプリケーション）と、2028年度を想定して探索した結果得られたアーキテクチャ向けのプログラミングモデルを探求し、想定される実装技術と合わせて性能評価を行う。

プログラミングモデル(プログラミング言語)は, プログラマと計算機のインタフェースであり, ますます複雑化, 階層化する計算機において,
その複雑さをそのままプログラマの負担としないためにも, 今後ますます重要になってくる. また将来のアーキテクチャ上でのアプリケーション性能を考える上でも,
プログラミングモデルやその実装方式を考慮する必要がある. なぜならば, アーキテクチャのパラメータ探索によって得られるものは,
理想的な負荷分散やデータ配置がなされるという前提での理想的な性能である場合や,
現在の(必ずしも将来のアーキテクチャに適したものとは限らない)プログラミングモデルやアプリケーションの記述,
コンパイル方式を前提にしたものである場合が多いからである.

本実施項目では, 広帯域メモリ, 深く階層化されたメモリ, 大容量光ネットワークなど, 将来のアーキテクチャの高速化を牽引すると考えられる要素に着目し,
それを活かすためのプログラミングモデルおよびもしくはその実装方式を探求し, そのもとでの代表アプリケーションの性能を評価, 探求する.

  1. (理研・東工大と共同) 代表アプリケーションの調査、選定、解析 

理研・東工大と共同で選定した代表アプリケーションの調査を行う. 本実施項目に関連の深い, 主要な計算カーネル, そのデータ配置や負荷分散方式などを抽出し,
プログラミングモデルと関係する定性的な特徴を解析する.

  1. プログラミングモデルおよびその実装方式の設計 

調査結果を元に, 想定するプログラミングモデルとその実装方式について検討する. プログラミングモデルはプログラマの負担, 性能,
汎用性などを考慮に入れて設計する必要が有り, アプリケーションの類型や応用領域毎に異なるものが複数存在することも考えられる.
実装方式としてはデータ配置や負荷分散の方式に関して, メモリの階層性を活かした最適化や,
広帯域メモリや大容量光ネットワークなどを活かした自動的な配置の可能性について探求する.

  1. アーキテクチャ及びプログラミングモデルを想定した性能評価 

アーキテクチャ探索の結果得られた, 2028を想定したアーキテクチャ上で, 想定したプログラミングモデルを用いた際の性能評価を行う.

